0.13: System stepping (#907)
bevyengine/bevy-website: content/news/2024-02-03-bevy-0.13/index.md

## System Stepping

<div class="release-feature-authors">authors: @dmlary</div>

The new system stepping feature (`bevy_debug_stepping`) adds debugger-style

> execution control for systems.  The [`Stepping`] resource can control which

Reviewer: ```suggestion
execution control for systems. The [`Stepping`] resource can control which
```

systems within a schedule execute each frame, and provides step, break, and
continue facilities to enable live debugging.  This feature is enabled by

> default in the bevy crate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
default in the `bevy` crate.
```

The `Stepping` resource is configured with a list of schedules that it will

> control execution of when stepping is enabled.  The collection of systems

Reviewer: ```suggestion
control execution of when stepping is enabled. The collection of systems
```

> within those schedules can be thought of as the stepping frame.  It can take

Reviewer: ```suggestion
within those schedules can be thought of as the stepping frame. It can take
```

multiple step or continue calls to traverse through the entire stepping frame.
During this time, all schedules that have not been added to `Stepping` are

> executing each frame.  This allows rendering & input handling to continue while

Reviewer: ```suggestion
executing each frame. This allows rendering & input handling to continue while
```

a system step, continuing the stepping frame, or the system has been exempt
from stepping.

### Execution Control: System Step & Continue Frame

While stepping is enabled, the `Stepping` resource tracks its location within
the stepping frame, maintaining a stepping cursor pointing at the next system
to be executed.
There are two ways systems get executed while stepping is enabled: system step,
and continue frame.

System step (`Stepping::step_frame()`) runs the system at the stepping
cursor, and advances the cursor during the next render frame.
This is useful to see individual changes made by
systems, and see the state of the world prior to executing a system

Continue frame (`Stepping::continue_frame()`) will execute systems starting
from the stepping cursor to the end of the stepping frame during the next frame.
It may stop before the end of the stepping frame if it encounters a system with
a breakpoint. This is useful for advancing quickly through an entire frame,
getting to the start of the next frame, or in combination with breakpoints.

In this video we demonstrate system step & continue frame on the breakout

> example with an egui interface.  The stepping cursor can be seen moving through

Reviewer: ```suggestion
example with a custom `egui` interface.  The stepping cursor can be seen moving through
```

You can set a breakpoint on those systems you care about, then use
`Stepping::continue_frame()` to run systems starting at the stepping cursor
until a breakpoint is encountered, or the end of the stepping frame.
If the stepping cursor points at a system with a breakpoint when you call
`Stepping::continue_frame()` that system will run.  This allows you to set
breakpoints through a system, and repeatedly continue the frame to stop prior
to each system of interest.

In this video of the breakout example, we add a breakpoint to
`check_for_collisions()` so we can verify the collision detection & handling
behavior each frame without stepping through all the other systems.

The video shows the stepping cursor moves from the start of the stepping frame
to `check_for_collisions()` the first time we click `continue` in the ui.  On
the next click, `check_for_collisions()` and all remaining systems are run,
moving the cursor back up to the start of the stepping frame.

<video controls><source src="stepping-breakpoint.mp4" type="video/mp4"/></video>

### Disabling Systems

During debugging, it can be helpful to disable systems to narrow down the

> source of the problem.  `Stepping::never_run()` and `Stepping::never_run_node()`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
source of the problem. `Stepping::never_run()` and `Stepping::never_run_node()`
```

can be used to disable systems while stepping is enabled.  Note that disabling

> systems in this manner only has an effect while stepping is enabled.  When

Reviewer: ```suggestion
systems in this manner only has an effect while stepping is enabled. When
```

stepping is disabled, all disabled systems will resume executing.

In this video of the breakout example, we disable the `check_for_collisions()`
system and use continue frame to move the ball into the center of the blocks,
then re-enable the system to have fun destroying all the blocks from the
inside.

<video controls><source src="stepping-disable-system.mp4" type="video/mp4"/></video>

### Excluding Systems from Stepping

It may be necessary to ensure some systems still run while stepping is enabled.
While best-practice is to have them in a schedule that has not been added to
the `Stepping` resource, it is possible to configure systems to always run

> while stepping is enabled.  This is primarily useful for event & input handling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
while stepping is enabled. This is primarily useful for event & input handling
```
